In the 21st century, the workplace conversation in the U.S. has shifted to include
diversity as a central organizational goal (Brown, 2004), especially when determining how organizational fit influences employee hiring decisions. Federal legislation grounds the focus on diversity, which provides employment access to members of protected groups (age, disability, race, color, sex, religion and national origin) within the workplace (Civil Rights Act of 1964). However, the term diversity did not emerge until the 1990s (Pompper, 2013) and has an “aim to create an inclusive culture that values and uses the talents of all would-be members” (Herring, 2009, p. 209).
Diversity is often an ambiguous term with varying definitions depending on the group
using it (Herring, 2009). Recently, the definition of diversity has been expanded to include multiple social identities found in contemporary society (Hurtado, Alvarez, Guillermo-Wann, Cuellar, & Arellano, 2012). These social identities include the race, gender, sexual orientation, age, geographic region, language, and other characteristics of the employee. Organizational leaders who value diversity recognize their employees bring multiple social identities to the workplace, which can be used to help the organization compete in a global society (Burns, Barton, & Kerby, 2012; Konrad, 2003; Herring, 2009).
Leaders have broadened the definition of diversity to be more inclusive without fully
addressing the underrepresentation of historically marginalized people within the workplace (Ahmed, 2012; Bond & Haynes, 2014; Collins, 2011). Historically underrepresented groups include Blacks/African Americans, Asian Americans, Latina/os, and Native Americans. These racial and ethnic groups are outgrowing their historical minority status, especially as their numbers continue to grow in the overall population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). Impact of Population Shifts on Workplace
Addressing the racial and ethnic underrepresentation of employees becomes even more
important as the U.S. demographics continue to shift. In the past, the U.S. population has consisted of a majority of people categorized as White (non-Hispanic). However, over time a shift has occurred in the population. Whites have experienced a slow decline in total population percentage, while representation by other racial and ethnic groups (African American, Asian American, Latina/os and Native American) has steadily grown.
2
Census data from 2013 demonstrate this shift in population demographics. The White
population made up 78% of the 316 million total in the U.S. (U.S. Census Bureau Population Division [U.S. Census Bureau], 2014), which was a 7% decline from the 85% make-up in 1960 (Passel & Cohn, 2008). This decline was due to a decrease in birth rates. Other racial groups either maintained or experienced birth rate growth and therefore had increases in their overall population percentages (Passel & Cohn, 2008; Ortman & Guarneri, 2009). For instance, African Americans grew from 19 million in the 1960’s to 41 million and they compose 13% of the current population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). Native Americans continued to compose 1% of the population. Asian Americans grew from 1.1 million in the 1960’s (Passel & Cohn, 2008) to 16 million and made up 5% of the total population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). Finally, Latina/os totaled 6.3 million in the 1960’s (Passel & Cohn, 2008) and grew to 54 million or 17% of the total population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). The steady overall population growth of Asian Americans and Latina/os was also due in part to increases in immigration rates (Passel & Cohn, 2008).
Immigration does not always explain changes in population demographics. During the
next four decades, Asian Americans and Latina/os populations will triple due to expected increases in both of their American-born birth rates. This will account for their populations tripling by 2050 to 9% and 29% of the total population respectively (Passel & Cohn, 2008). According to population estimates, the African American population is expected to double, but will continue to maintain 13% of the total population, which reflects the growth in other ethnic/racial groups. During this same period, the country will transition to a majority-minority country (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012) as predictions for the White total population continue to decrease to 47% by 2050 (Passel & Cohn, 2008).
As racial demographics continue to shift, there is a direct impact on the labor force. The
labor force is defined as the civilian non-institutionalized U.S. population and includes those above the ages of 16, regardless of employment status, who are also not in the armed forces, or confined to an institution (e.g. nursing home or prison) (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2014). Byars-Winston, Fouad, and Wen (2015) investigated how the growth in the U.S. demographics affected the labor force. Since 1970, Whites experienced steady increases and make up the largest proportion of the labor force. Aligning with shifts in the population, in 2000, Whites experienced a decline in their labor force participation rates. African Americans, Asian
3
Americans, and Latina/os also experienced labor force growth, as their demographics continued to grow, while Native Americans maintained both their labor force participation and overall population.
By 2020, the total number of employees is expected to grow 5.9% (Burns et al., 2012)
and labor force projections estimate the workforce will include 12.4% African Americans, 6.2% Asian Americans, and 19.1% Latina/os (Tossi, 2013). As the total White population continues to decrease, this will provide an opportunity for organization leaders to hire additional people of color to represent accurately the diversity of the U.S. population (Byars-Winston et al., 2015). Changes in the Workforce Impact on the Workplace
Beyond the changing demographics, hiring diverse candidates makes the organization
more competitive. The inclusion of people of color brings in diverse talents, skills, and thoughts, which lead to innovation within the workplace (Burns et al., 2012). The changing labor force and population demographics provide organizational leaders with the justification to focus on diversity to ensure the strongest organizational fit of employees (Collins, 2011).
Despite demographic changes and governmental interventions, many workplace leaders
have failed to align their hiring practices with the changing demographics (Byars-Winston et al., 2015). For instance, between 1966 and 1971, 35% of workplaces employed no African American males, 61% did not employ Latino men, 53% did not employ African American women; 76% employed no Latina women, and 94% employed no Asian American workers regardless of gender in Employment Equal Opportunity Commission (EEOC) monitored workplaces (Tomaskovic-Devey & Stainback, 2007). To address and decrease discrimination in the workplace, Congress created Employment Equal Opportunity (EEO) policies in 1964.
After 1980, the number of workers of color plateaued, especially in workplaces
monitored by EEOC (Tomaskovic-Devey & Stainback, 2007). Twenty-one percent of organizations did not employ African Americans; 28% did not employ Latino men or African American women, 35% did not employ Latina women, and 45% did not employ any Asian American workers. In addition, 5.4% of EEO monitored organizations did not employ any workers of color (Tomaskovic-Devey & Stainback, 2007). Although African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latina/os experienced growth in their labor force participation after 1980. By 2002, employees, especially women of color, experienced racial segregation in the workplace at levels similar to those of the 1966 workplace (Tomaskovic-Devey & Stainback, 2007). Despite
4
the changing demographics and support from the EEOC, workplace leaders did not aggressively take steps necessary to maintain the representation of people of color within their organization. Steps to Increase Workplace Diversity
As historical evidence shows, the workplace does not effortlessly transition to
accommodate the increase in societal diversity. Therefore, institutional leaders must prepare for this demographic shift by developing new proactive strategies (Cook, 2013). Organizational leaders can take several steps to prepare for the shift. First, prior researchers conclude organizational leaders can rethink recruitment, hiring, and retention practices to attract and retain diverse professionals (Buttner, Lowe, & Billings-Harris, 2009; Konrad, 2003). In particular, leaders who have a higher racial awareness are more likely to have employees that represent the country’s demographics (Buttner et al., 2009). Racial awareness is the ability to recognize racial and ethnic identities and understand how they could potential influence interactions (Buttner et al., 2009). Rethinking recruitment, hiring, and retention is a way to increase racial awareness.
Second, prior researchers highlight a need for employers to recognize the historical
implications of hiring and workplace policies and practices, which have excluded people of color (Bond & Haynes, 2014; Buttner et al., 2009). Continuing to ignore a history of these practices perpetuates the exclusion of certain groups of people, which in turn has a negative impact on a company’s bottom line. As such, it is in the interest of organizations to adopt practices and policies of inclusivity. In a study of 1,002 U.S. corporations, companies with high levels (greater than 25%) of racial diversity had 35,000 customers compared to companies with low levels of diversity (less than 10%), which had 22,700 customers (Herring, 2009). These same high diversity organizations also had a mean of $761.3 million overall sales revenue compared to $51.9 million for those with lower levels of racial diversity (Herring, 2009). These correlational findings provide researchers with the impetus to understand qualitatively the relationship between the variables.
Third, leaders have the ability to set the institutional vision and take proactive steps to
ensure the work environment is open and inclusive for employees of color (Victorino, NylundGibson, & Conley, 2013). The definition of work environment is the geographic location, organizational culture, and the mission guiding the organization. The work environment plays a key role in diversity (Pompper, 2013), and organizational leaders are influential in changing their employees’ racial perceptions (Mayhew, Grunwald, & Dey, 2006). Organizational leaders can
5
harness this influence to impact “staff demographics, department climate for diversity, institutional commitment to diversity, and staff experiences with diversity” (Mayhew et al., 2006, p. 76).), Section(heading=Higher Education as a Workplace, text=Despite calls for changes in organizational behavior and workforce diversity, people of
color remain underrepresented (Buttner et al., 2009). People of color are underrepresented especially within higher education workplaces (Buttner et al., 2009). Higher education leaders still struggle to overcome the historical past of exclusionary practices (Brown, 2004). For instance, prior to the Civil Rights movement, Predominately White Institutions (PWI) were segregated and had few or no faculty members or administrators of color (Wolfe & Freeman, 2013). Even today, many liberal arts institutions, especially those with a religious focus, have been slow and even resistant to increasing the number of underrepresented administrators of color (Yancey, 2010).
Like businesses, many higher education leaders understand the economic benefit of
diversity. Many institutions are working to incorporate diversity-related terminology into their missions and strategic plans (Ahmed, 2012) to capture the changing student demographics that serve as revenue sources. This changing demographic can especially be seen as Whites made up 84.3% of the student population in 1976 while African Americans, Asian Americans, Latina/os, and Native Americans made up 15.7% (Snyder & Dillow, 2013). By 2011, Whites decreased to 61.2% of the student population while African Americans, Asian Americans, Latina/os and Native Americans grew to 38.8% (Snyder & Dillow, 2013). Even with increased student diversity, these changes do not always translate to changes into the institutional climate or receptive environments for people of color (Ahmed, 2012; Brown, 2004).
Higher education leaders, who understand the positive impact of an inclusive racial
climate, are more likely to employ people from diverse backgrounds (Buttner et al., 2009). These leaders have the ability to set the vision and take proactive steps to ensure the work environment is open to diversity (Victorino et al., 2013). However, higher education is slow to change (Birnbaum, 1988; Brown, 2004).
Currently, there are 238,718 administrators working in higher education (Almanac of
Higher Education, 2014b). Of the total higher education administrators, 84,911 (35.6%) worked at public four-year institutions, while 118,268 (50%) worked at private four-year institutions
6
(Almanac of Higher Education, 2014b). Administrators of color made up 19.5% of the total number of administrators within higher education (Almanac of Higher Education, 2014b) even though people of color represent 35% of the U.S. population. There are two perspectives often provided to explain the under-representation of administrators of color.
First, some argue Blacks and Latina/os are employed at higher rates in positions that do
not require a college education (Byars-Winston et al., 2015). Others argue the limited number of people of color who complete either bachelors or master’s degrees, explains the low proportion of administrators of color by limiting the number of people of color eligible to work at colleges and universities (Almanac of Higher Education, 2014a). Despite these two perspectives, between 1990 and 2014, African Americans, Latina/os, and Asian Americans aged 25 to 29 increased in the number of bachelor’s and master’s degree holders. African Americans increased from 13% to 22% at the bachelor’s degree level, and grew from 2% to 4% in the total number possessing a master’s degree (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2015). The number of Latina/os with bachelor’s degrees grew from 8% to 43% while increasing from 2% to 3% in the number of master’s degrees (NCES, 2015). Asian Americans grew from 43% to 61% in possessing bachelor’s degrees while master’s degree recipients grew from 11% to 18% (NCES, 2015). However, these increases in degree recipients did not necessarily translate into increases in higher education professionals.
Between 2000 and 2012, administrators of color experienced minimal growth in their
racial composition (Desrochers & Kirshstein, 2014). Examining 2001, the overall higher education professional staff included 10% African Americans, 4.8% Asian Americans, 5.1% Latina/o, and 0.6% Native Americans (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2003). Just 10 years later, the overall professional staff decreased by 0.1% for both African Americans and Native Americans. During this same period, Asian Americans and Latina/os grew by 1% and .05% respectively (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2012). Despite the limited number of administrators of color, the higher education workforce increased by 28% between 2000 and 2012. This growth was 50% faster than any other period and mirrored the student body growth in public higher education (Desrochers & Kirshstein, 2014).
This decline and minimal growth of employees of color is important, as educational
researchers have called for an increase in hiring faculty members and administrators of color to
7
align with the growth of students from historically marginalized groups (Anderson, 2003; Flowers, 2003). Increasing faculty and staff diversity helps to ensure college and university administrators are meeting their institutional missions of preparing students to work in diverse settings by creating diverse learning environments (Hurtado, Ruiz Alvarado, & Guillermo-Wann, 2015), while providing the support mechanisms necessary for student retention (Flowers, 2003). Beyond educational benefits, the diversity of higher education professionals encourages the recruitment of new professionals of color and supports “institutional and societal transformation” (Jayakumar, Howard, Allen & Han, 2009, p. 539).
Administrators wanting to bring about change within higher education need to focus on
hiring, institutional climate (Brown, 2004), and institutionalized behaviors and policies that are resistant to change (Victorino et al., 2013). As the United States continues to become more diverse and represent the changing demographics, higher education leaders must also rethink the racial and ethnic representation of administrators within their colleges and universities. A Model for Examining Organizational Fit
Organizational fit is an approach to rethink and increase the diversity and retention of
administrators of color. Traditionally, human resource officers and theorists used organizational fit to understand how and why some people are successful within their organizations, while not successfully hiring and/or retaining other employees (Chatman, 1991; Edwards, Cable, Williamson, Lambert, & Shipp, 2006). Cultural researchers view organizational fit through a global perspective and a combination of compatibility and diversity within the workplace (Chatman, 1991; Nahavandi & Malekzadeh, 1999). Through a cultural lens, questions can be raised about the compatibility of new employees and their interactions during the initial phases of employment (Chatman, 1991).
Compatibility is how employees interpret their goals and values to align, assimilate, and
function within the organization (Bolman & Deal, 2013; Chatman, 1991; Nahavandi & Malekzadeh, 1999; Schalm, 2013). It also speaks to the responsiveness of workplace leaders to address the individual needs of the employee in respect to the employee’s work desires (Bolman & Deal, 2013). Employers then select employees who enhance the institutional diversity while pushing and expanding the organization’s central and peripheral values (Nahavandi & Malekzadeh, 1999). Compatibility and diversity work in partnership to ensure that both the employee and the organization benefit.
8
Compatibility, within the lens of higher education, focuses on the composition of the
many individuals who lead and make critical decisions to enhance the operation of their institution. Prior research has focused on organizational fit of faculty (Absher, 2009; Butner & Burley, 2000; Jayakumar et al., 2009; Marston & Brunetti, 2009; Victorino et al., 2013) or academic administrators (Jackson, 2000, 2003a, 2004b). However, limited research has focused on non-academic administrators. At public and private institutions, non-academic administrators include individuals serving on both the academic and non-academic sides of campus (Desrochers & Kirshstein, 2014). Academic administrators include academic department heads, academic deans (associate/assistant) and provosts. Non-academic administrators include professionals such as student affairs officers, academic support professionals, business office staff members, registrars, admissions and financial aid officers.
Engagement, Retention, and Advancement (ERA) Model
Jackson (2004a) developed the Engagement, Retention, and Advancement (ERA) Model
to conceptualize organizational fit for administrators of color (Jackson, 2004a) and to understand their compatibility within higher education. The model focuses on how the organizational fit experiences of African American administrators at research-intensive institutions either facilitated or impeded their Engagement, Retention, and Advancement within higher education. The model breaks down the three larger themes of Engagement, Retention, and Advancement into four domains necessary to understand the organizational fit of African American administrators while they professionally develop in their respective fields within higher education. The domains include Pre-engagement, Engagement, Advancement, and Outcomes, which show the institutions commitment to the greater community and acceptance of general “principles of diversity and affirmative action” (Jackson, 2004a, p. 216).
Pre-engagement is the foundational phase, which focuses on institutional activities to
recruit, orient, and provide adequate incentive packages for new administrators (Jackson, 2004a). The recruitment process entails the overt public strategies the institution engages in to bring qualified African American applicants into the candidate pool. Orientation is two-fold and connects the administrator on the community and campus level. The community level orientation links the administrator with the larger African American community outside of the higher education institution via religious organizations and social networks. The campus level orientation introduces them to the campus community and culture. Institutional leaders then
9
need to provide comparable and competitive incentive packages. The goal of the pre-engagement phase is to support African Americans’ early retention within the institution.
The second phase, Engagement, addresses the support provided to administrators that
enables them to function daily in their position. There are four components of this phase: empowerment, leadership opportunities, mentoring, and in-service professional development (Jackson, 2004a). Empowerment focuses on supervisors and colleagues trusting the administrator as a qualified professional to complete assigned job roles and responsibilities. Second, African American administrators need to be provided with opportunities to take part in leadership roles within the organization and professional community. However, institutional leaders need to balance these opportunities to ensure administrators can accomplish their assigned job responsibilities.
Formal and informal mentoring provides African American administrators with
professional connections to veteran administrators, who can help navigate the institutional culture and overall professional trajectory. In-service development aids the administrator in acquiring the necessary competences to stay up-to-date on the position. Jackson (2004a) suggests the in-service workshop should pay special attention to the needs of African Americans working in the position.
The third phrase, Advancement, centers on the retention of African American
administrators. There are three components: professional release time, professional development funds, and experiences beyond the diversity mission of the institution (Jackson, 2004a). Professional release time focuses on the institutional support for administrators to engage in professional development activities and support services for African American students. Release time serves as a substitution for time spent on these activities with other work hours. Professional development funds provide institutional resources provided to allow African American administrators to engage in professional development. Third, African American administrators need time to participate in non-diversity related activities. This provides them with the opportunity to develop expertise necessary to advance within their professional field.
The final domain is Outcomes, which addresses retention and career advancement.
Retention addresses the administrator’s tenure within the institution with the goal being to maintain African Americans at the same rate as their White counterparts (Jackson, 2004a).
10
Career advancement is the preservation and advancement of administrators within their institution and/or the overall profession of higher education administration.
Jackson’s (2004a) ERA model is helpful when examining the organizational fit of
administrators of color. I designed this research study to expand the model and increase the organizational fit literature. Initially, the model used a sample of African American administrators employed at large research institutions. I used Jackson’s (2004a) ERA model to examine administrators of color working at small liberal arts institutions. This allowed for the model to be examined on an additional institutional type, while also expanding it beyond just African American administrators. This study also included Asian Americans, Latina/os, and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander administrators. This was important as prior research focused solely on the organizational fit of administrators without regard to race or ethnicity (Erdogan & Bauer, 2005; Forward, Czech, & Allen, 2007; Marston & Brunetti, 2009; Schroder, 2008; Webb, 2009) or solely African Americans (Butner & Burley, 2000; Flowers, 2003; Gardner, Barrett, & Pearson, 2014; Jackson, 2003b; Jackson & Flowers, 2003). This study also contributed to the literature by using a utilizing a phenomenological design to interview and analyze the data. This qualitative approach expands Jackson’s (2004a) ERA model beyond the Delphi technique, which relies on expert panelists (Jackson, 2001, 2002, 2004a; Jackson & Flowers, 2003).
Statement of the Problem
Diversity has moved to a central organizational goal within the workplace. Agreement
on a single definition of diversity is difficult to achieve (Herring, 2009) but organizational leaders often expand the definition to include the multiple social identities (race, gender, sexual orientation, age, geographic region, language, etc.), which make up each employee. However, this expanded focus on diversity does not adequately address the historical and current underrepresentation of people of color within the workplace (Ahmed, 2012; Bond & Haynes, 2014; Collins, 2009).
The U.S. population is undergoing racial demographic shifts (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014).
Historically, Whites made up the greatest proportion of the population (Passel & Cohn, 2008). In 2014, Whites’ overall percentage of the population decreased from prior years (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). At the same time, African American, Asian American, and Latina/o groups increased in the percentage of the population, they represent (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). The population will continue to shift, as African American, Asian American, and Latina/o
11
populations continue to grow. The changes in the country’s demographics have had a direct impact on the workforce. In 2012, people of color made up 36% of the workforce (Burns et al., 2012). In addition, employment projections show an increase of people of color by 2020 (Tossi, 2013).
Changes in the workforce should lead to changes in the workplace. The workplace has
been slow to adjust to the shifting demographics. Organizational leaders need to take proactive steps to increase the diversity within the workplace (Cook, 2013). Steps include rethinking recruitment and hiring practices (Buttner et al., 2009; Konrad, 2003) while also being cognizant of their history of excluding people of color within the workplace (Buttner et al., 2009). By improving the organization’s climate, leaders may reduce costs related to absenteeism and turnover (Robinson & Dechant, 1997) to ensure employee retention.
Despite the call for change, there continues to be an underrepresentation of people of
color in the workforce, especially within higher education (Almanac of Higher Education, 2014b; Buttner et al., 2009). This is due in part to how slowly higher education changes (Birnbaum, 1988; Brown, 2004) and institutional climates (Ahmed, 2012; Brown, 2004). Organizational leaders can examine the organizational fit of administrators of color to help increase the diversity of their institution. Engagement, Retention, and Advancement (ERA) is a model that can be used to examine the experiences of administrators of color fit within higher education.
Prior research exists on the organizational fit of African American faculty members and
academic administrators at large research institutions. However, there is a dearth of literature on other racial groups. In addition, little research exists viewing organizational fit outside of large research institutions. Additional research is needed to focus on expanding the literature to include other institutional types (for example, community colleges, comprehensive, religious institutions, and small liberal arts institutions). Finally, there is a need to expand the higher education literature on organizational fit to non-academic administrators of color. To address these issues, the lived experiences of non-academic administrators of color at small liberal arts institutions were examined through the lens of organizational fit.
Purpose of the Study
This study was about organizational fit. Specifically, I was interested in how
administrators of color at small liberal arts institutions experience fit within their organizational
12
setting. Jackson’s (2004a) Engagement, Retention, and Advancement (ERA) Model served as the foundation for the understanding organizational fit.
The sample included administrators of color at small liberal arts institutions. For this
study, administrators include non-academic professionals at any level within the institution (Hirt, Kirk, McGuire, Mount, & Nelson-Hensley, 2003). Non-academic administrators held positions in student affairs, academic support, business office, registrar, admissions and financial aid offices, and similar departments. Administrators of color included those who identified from a racial/ethnic group traditionally underrepresented within higher education, such as Blacks/African Americans, Asian Americans, Latina/os, and Native Americans. Small liberal arts institutions included colleges and universities with a focus on undergraduate education and a total enrollment of less than 2,500 students (Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching [Carnegie Foundation], 2010; U.S. News and World Report, 2014). Using a phenomenological design, I interviewed selected administrators to understand their experiences with organizational fit.
Research Questions
The following research question guided the design of this study:
What is the nature of lived experiences of organizational fit among non-academic administrators of color at small liberal arts institutions?
Significance of the Study
This study was significant for three campus constituencies. First, findings from this
study may inform human resource (HR) administrators about recruitment, hiring, and orientation experiences of people of color. HR staff members may be able to use the findings to review their institutions’ recruiting and hiring practices to advance diversity and inclusion.
Administrators of color might also find the findings beneficial. Findings of this study
provided data on professional development and steps that lead to career advancement both within institutions and within higher education administrative ranks. Administrators of color might use the findings to determine their professional development plan to progress within their profession.
Third, diversity officers might benefit from the findings of this study. Findings described
the organizational fit experiences of administrators of color. Diversity officers might use this information to develop programs and services to ensure the institution is a receptive environment for administrators of color.
13
The study also held significance institutional policy makers. First, findings provided
insights into the advancement experiences of non-academic administrators of color. Policymakers might use this information to evaluate policies on the allocation of diversityrelated responsibilities and resources. Second, findings provided institutional budget committees with information about professional development funds necessary to support nonacademic administrators of color. Policymakers might use this information when considering budget increases for departments to support the engagement of non-academic administrators of color. Third, human resource policymakers might find the findings beneficial. The findings provided them with data about the retention and advancement of non-academic administrators of color. Policymakers might use this information to evaluate their employee performance review policies.
The present study also had significance for future research. I examined the
organizational fit of administrators of color from African American, Asian American, Latina/o, and Native American racial and ethnic groups. Future research might compare organizational fit between non-academic White administrators and non-academic administrators of color. In addition, a comparison could be made between groups of administrators of color or with other minoritized groups, such as LGBT administrators. Such a study would expand what is known about organizational fit among non-academic administrators across ethnic, racial, and other minoritized groups.
This study also focused on organizational fit at small liberal arts institutions. Future
studies might focus on examining the organizational fit of non-academic administrators at additional institutional types. Potential institutional types include comprehensive universities, religious colleges, large private institutions, or community colleges. Such a study would expand on the literature available about organizational fit among non-academic administrators serving at different institutional types.
Finally, this study focused on the experience of non-academic administrators. Future
research might examine the experiences of supervising administrators working with nonacademic administrators or the experiences of academic administrators. Such a study would expand the research to view organizational fit from the viewpoint of the supervisor and provide supervisors with tools to use when working with their staff. It would also increase the literature
14
on academic administrators, who work on the faculty side of institutions and often serve in a different capacity than non-academic administrators.
Delimitations
Like all research projects, this study had delimitations. The first dealt with the sample.
All respondents volunteered to participate in this study. People who self-selected to participate in the study may have differed in some important ways from people who did not opt to participate. This could have influenced the findings in some unforeseen manner.
A second delimitation involved the method. I used a qualitative research method. The
goal of qualitative research is to understand how participants make sense of their experience with the phenomenon studied (Rossman & Rallis, 2012). This limits the findings of the study to the actual participants of the study and constrains the transferability and generalizability to a large group. However, the phenomenological method allowed for the advancing transferability to the maximum extent possible.
A final delimitation was data collection. Participants reflected on previous experiences
with Engagement, Retention, and Advancement. As a researcher, I relied on the recall of the participants. There is a potential for participants to have difficulty recalling events as they occurred due to the passing of time (Patton, 2015). Interviewing participants as they advanced through each stage may have provided a clearer understanding of their experiences. This would allow for a longitudinal, real-time study.
This study was worthwhile despite the delimitations. There is a lack of scholarship that
details the experiences of non-academic administrators of color at small liberal arts institutions. This study examined the lived experiences of such administrators.
Organization of the Study
This study is organized around five chapters. Chapter One is an introduction of the topic
and purpose of the study, the research questions and significance of the study. Chapter Two contains a review of the literature relevant to the study. Chapter Three includes an explanation of the methodology of the study, including the sample, interview protocol, and the procedures for collecting and analyzing the data. Chapter Four comprises a description of the findings. Chapter Five includes a discussion of the findings with respect to how it might raise questions and provide explanations about the ongoing problem of underrepresentation of non-academic administrators of color within higher education.
15